# Open Source

The virtue of public blockchains is that they share each other’s code and seek the development of general blockchain technology. Kaia is developed by forking Ethereum source code and referred various open source project technologies. Therefore, Kaia also tries to repay the blockchain ecosystem by open-sourcing code again. Especially, because lots of efforts were put in to achieve 1 second block generation time, the projects that are interested in reducing latency will make a good reference out of it.

The participation of the developer community at public blockchain is one of the important factors for success. Since the design of Kaia, Ethereum that is the strongest developer community is selected as base code considering this, and by protecting solidity compatibility as smart contract language, it is supporting original blockchain engineers to transfer to Kaia easily. Also, Ethereum Toolkits also tried to protect compatibility so that it is able to drive at Kaia with a little bit of modification. In contrast, tools developed for Kaia can also be used at Ethereum with a little bit of modification. Through this, we hope there are more opportunities for two platforms’ community to exchange with each other.

By open sourcing Kaia, we opened Kaia development to the community. So, all engineers can participate in Kaia development in various formats from translation, bug reporting to the code commit. We provide the Kaia Ecosystem Fund (KEF) support program to encourage the participation of open source developers. KEF is the program that offers for Kaia development at the community and receives funding to reach this. This makes financial support to be rewarded for enthusiastic participants.